# Cardiovascular-Disease-Prediction-Model

ABSTRACT

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is one of the most deadly diseases that cause death in human history. The world population keeps increasing and everyone needs to have better health status more especially CVD which is considered as a deathly health problem, this requires urgent attention. Technological solutions are mostly deployed to tackle the majority of health challenges in medical institutions. Big Data is an advanced technology that is used in general domains which helps to give a precise and accurate process of providing the solution to all aspects of life. As we have experienced that technology keeps growing on an exponential trend, this initiated the need for prediction models in medical research. Medically, CVD is a type of disease that involves the blood vessels or heart and other sensitive organs in the human body system. As CVD is considered among the major diseases that require multiple diagnostic procedures, the process involves multiple traditional medical examinations which may lead to a high tendency of medical errors. Another challenge is that most of the devices that are used in CVD diagnosis use high frequency and gamma rays which produce radiation signals, exposing the patients to high risk of other diseases. The majority of the devices for diagnosing CVD are very expensive, many patients from LMICs are less privileged, and many families have lost their lives due to the inability to pay for the diagnostic procedures. Even the acquisition of CVD diagnosing devices is very challenging in the regions of LMICs as it is very expensive, which is not available to many healthcare institutions. Healthcare institutions have been providing solutions with the help of AI and ML. AI and ML are among the most excellent and most usable methods that are trending in giving solutions to any trending problem in medical institutions. In this research, we focus on how to provide a prediction model that is capable of providing informed decisions on CVD data with the help of supervised learning algorithms, for both classification and regression.  This research adopted the CRISP-DM framework which consists of six phases; Business Understanding, Data Understanding, Data Preparation, System Modelling, System Evaluation, and Deployment. In this work, we selected five phases excluding the Deployment phase. At the end of our research, we conducted experiments beginning with exploratory data analysis, data cleansing, data visualization, transforming the dataset then splitting the CVD dataset, by allocating 80% of the dataset to training and the remaining 20% as a testing dataset. We applied the different ML algorithms on the training dataset where we achieved the best accuracy from Random Forest, Extra Tree Classifier and Decision Tree all with 98.18% on train dataset, for further experimental selection we proceeded to on test dataset where we have obtained Random Forest 79.22%, Extra Tree Classifier 78.68% and Decision Tree 73.48% and other algorithms happened to reflect with low accuracy. So the research finally featured the Random Forest Algorithm as the best based on the performance measures used in the experiments.
